
Azure storage redundancy:
LRS (Locally redundant storage):
with in the datacenter 3 copies will be maintained.
Low cost
No protection against datacenter failure

ZRS (Zone redudant storage):
Data will store in 3 zones with in the region.
Zone1, Zone2, Zone3.
For any region zone1 is failed, zone2 and 3 will become available.

All zones are failed with disaster region.
Entire datacenter based on the zone will not be available.


GRS (Geo-Redundant Storage):
data store in primary and secondary regions.


RA-GRS (Read Access Geo-Redundant Storage):
Same as GRS, but:

Primary Region
      ↓
Secondary Region
      ↓
Read Access Available
You can read from the secondary region even if the primary is healthy.



GZRS (Geo-Zone Redundant Storage)
Best protection.

Primary Region
   ├─ Zone 1
   ├─ Zone 2
   └─ Zone 3
          ↓
Secondary Region

Combines:
ZRS (zone protection)
GRS (region protection)




Blob vs ADLS:
Azure Blob Storage is a flat-namespace object store designed for general-purpose, unstructured data. Azure Data Lake Storage (ADLS) Gen2 is built on top of Blob Storage but adds a hierarchical namespace



source:
Allow schema drift: if source type changes column freqently it allows all fields to flow through transformation  to the sink. 
Infer drifted column types: auto-detect column data types.

copy activity:
source:
File Path in Dataset:  You specify the exact file name in the dataset.
Wildcard File Path:  Read multiple files matching a pattern.   (*.csv)
List of Files (Dynamic): Pass file names dynamically.


Sink:
copy behaviour:
Preserve Hierarchy:
Maintains the same folder structure as the source.

Source:
/input/2026/01/file1.csv
/input/2026/02/file2.csv
Sink:
/output/2026/01/file1.csv
/output/2026/02/file2.csv


Flatten Hierarchy:
Copies all files into a single folder.

Source:
/input/2026/01/file1.csv
/input/2026/02/file2.csv
Sink:
/output/file1.csv
/output/file2.csv


Merge Files:
Combines multiple source files into a single output file.

Source:
file1.csv
file2.csv
file3.csv

Sink:
merged.csv

Max rows per file  --> max number of rows in a file.
 


source is table:
Table, query, stored procedure
partition option None, Physical partitions of table, Dynamic range.

settings:
Maximum data integration unit  --> DIU's increase for processing large files (DIU means like cluster).
Degree of copy parallelism   --> enable parallem copying mechanism
Fault tolerance  --> if any small kind of errors ouccured during the process, still it process.
                      Skip incompatible rows
                      Skip missing files
                      Log rejected records
`

1. How do you copy 1 TB of data efficiently?
Enable partitioning
Enable parallel copy
Increase DIUs
Use staging


2. What is Parallel Copy?
ADF splits data and copy parallel   (enable Degree of copy parallelism).

3. What issues have you faced with Copy Activity?
Slow throughput
Timeouts
Network issues
Schema mismatch
Source locking
Partition skew
Small file problem

4. How do you troubleshoot a slow Copy Activity?
Microsoft-style answer
Understand the issue
Check throughput
    MB/s
    Rows/s
Identify bottleneck
    Source
    IR
    Network
    Sink
Check DIU and parallelism
Review source query performance
Apply optimization


5.What partition options are available?

For relational sources:
Physical Partitions
Dynamic Range Partition
Hash Partition


6. Copy Activity is running for 5 hours. What do you do?

Answer:
Check throughput
Check source query
Check DIU
Check parallel copy
Check IR performance
Check sink bottleneck


7. 500 GB file is failing. How do you handle it?

Answer:
Split file
Use partitioning
Increase DIU
Enable staging
Use Databricks if transformation required



8. let us say a 100GB file is processing in between after 60 GB processed pipeline is failed.
How do you process only the remaining 40 GB?

Unfortunately, Copy Activity does not support checkpoint restart within a file.
If a 100 GB CSV fails at 60 GB:
Next run starts from beginning ADF will copy the entire file again.

This can be processing with some option-1:
Split Files (100GB into multiple files)
process file by file if pipeline failed at any file we can rerun that specific file.
files (100GB)
customers_part1.csv
customers_part2.csv
customers_part3.csv
customers_part4.csv

pipeline flow:
Get Metadata
ForEach
Copy Activity

option-2: Watermark-Based Processing

option-3: Databricks Checkpointing

if cluster crashes: Restart from checkpoint


9. What if the file is 500 GB and cannot be split?
I would use a distributed processing framework such as Databricks/Spark to read the file in partitions and leverage checkpointing. Copy Activity is primarily a data movement service and does not provide record-level recovery within a file.

10. Copy Activity Slow

Question:
A Copy Activity that normally finishes in 20 minutes is taking 2 hours. How do you troubleshoot?

Expected areas:

Source bottleneck
Sink bottleneck
IR performance
Network latency
DIU settings
Parallel copy settings
File size increase


11. Watermark table updated but pipeline failed. How do you avoid missing records?
Correct Approach
Update Watermark Only After Successful Load

Flow:
Read Current Watermark
        ↓
Extract Data
        ↓
Load Data
        ↓
Validation
        ↓
Update Watermark

Not:
Extract
Update Watermark
Load


12. A folder contains 1000 files. How do you process only the latest file?
Use this ADF pattern:

Get Metadata
   ↓
Filter / ForEach
   ↓
Find latest file by lastModified
   ↓
Copy Activity


13.Enable Partitioning
Partitioning is configured in the Source tab.

Example: SQL Server Source
Table:
Customer
100 Million Records

Source Tab
Partition Option

Choose:
Dynamic Range

Specify:
Partition Column = CustomerID

ADF generates:
Partition 1:
CustomerID 1-25000000
Partition 2:
CustomerID 25000001-50000000
Partition 3:
CustomerID 50000001-75000000
Partition 4:
CustomerID 75000001-100000000

All run simultaneously. With partitioning: 4 Parallel Queries



14: What is Physical Partition?
If the source database table is already partitioned at the database level, ADF can use those partitions directly.
read data those partition by parallel. 
without partition one single query read it took 40 minutes. 
if table has 4 partition, 4 queries will read totally take 10 minutes.





1. Tell me about a performance issue you faced in Copy Activity.

Sample Answer:
In one of my projects, we had an ADF Copy Activity that loaded approximately 300 million records daily from an on-premises SQL Server into ADLS. The pipeline was expected to finish within 1 hour, but suddenly the runtime increased from 45 minutes to nearly 3 hours, causing SLA violations.

Step 1: Understand the Issue
I first verified whether the issue was isolated to a single run or occurring consistently. After reviewing the monitoring history, I found that multiple recent runs were experiencing similar delays.

Step 2: Identify the Bottleneck
I checked the Copy Activity metrics such as rows read, rows written, throughput, DIU usage, and execution duration. Throughput had dropped significantly compared to previous successful runs.

Step 3: Check Recent Changes
I spoke with the source database team and found that the source table volume had increased significantly due to a new business process. The source query was now reading a much larger dataset.

Step 4: Analyze Logs and Metrics
I noticed that partitioning was not enabled. The Copy Activity was executing a single query and reading all records sequentially. Source CPU utilization was also high during the load window.

Step 5: Root Cause
The root cause was that the increased data volume was being processed through a single-threaded read operation, creating a bottleneck at the source.

Step 6: Fix
I enabled Dynamic Range Partitioning using the primary key column and increased the Degree of Copy Parallelism. This allowed ADF to read multiple partitions concurrently. I also increased the DIU setting after validating source capacity.

Example:
Partition 1: 1–75 million
Partition 2: 75–150 million
Partition 3: 150–225 million
Partition 4: 225–300 million
Result

After implementing partitioning and parallel copy, the pipeline runtime dropped from approximately 3 hours to around 50 minutes, bringing it back within SLA.

Prevention:
To prevent future issues, I added monitoring for throughput trends, row counts, and execution duration. We also established a review process whenever source data volume increased significantly.

Follow-up Questions They May Ask
Q: Why did you choose that partition column?
Answer:
It was a numeric primary key with an even distribution and proper indexing, making it suitable for Dynamic Range Partitioning.

Q: Why not just increase DIU?
Answer:
Increasing DIU alone would not solve the source read bottleneck. The major issue was the lack of parallel reads, so partitioning provided the biggest improvement.

Q: How did you verify the bottleneck was at the source?
Answer:
I compared source CPU utilization, query execution times, and ADF throughput metrics. The source database showed high utilization during the load window, confirming the bottleneck.




Issues:
1. Source Table Missing Index:
SELECT * FROM Orders
WHERE ModifiedDate > @Watermark 

No index on: ModifiedDate


2. Data Skew:
Data:

US = 90%
India = 5%
Others = 5%
Symptoms
One partition runs 2 hours
Others finish in 2 minutes
Root Cause

Bad partition column.

Fix
Partition using:
CustomerID
OrderID


3. small file problem:
Source:

2 Million CSV Files

Each:

10 KB
Symptoms
Copy Activity slow
Get Metadata slow
Root Cause

Metadata overhead.

Fix
Merge files.
Convert to:
Parquet
Delta




2. What is the largest dataset you moved and what challenges did you face?
The largest dataset I worked with was approximately 20 TB of historical customer and transaction data migrated from on-prem SQL Server to Azure.

Architecture
On-Prem SQL Server
        ↓
ADF Copy Activity
        ↓
ADLS Gen2 (Bronze)
        ↓
Databricks
        ↓
Delta Tables
        ↓
Gold Layer


challenges:
network failure
network throughout slowness
one table has 4GB data after loading 1 GB data pipeline was failed due to network issue. deleted the target data and re-process it.
copy activity doesn't have check-point mechanism to restart from were it was failed.
We have a another approach of handling this, spliting data into multiple files and process it but since it was first time moving data from on-prem to cloud.
we want to issue want of issues we will face, this we are doing in UAT. There is no SLA's here.



Data Flow:
we can define the compute size:
small, meduim, large, custom (general, memory optimized).

general: 
Balanced CPU and memory.
best for simple transformation, small to medium joins and data sizes in GB.

Memory optimized:
More RAM to cores
best for large joins, aggregations, GBs to TBs, complex logic...

A Flowlet in Azure Data Factory (ADF) Mapping Data Flows is a reusable set of transformations that can be used across multiple data flows.



Watermark vs Tumbling window in incremental load:
Using both incremental load should be process, thier is no difference in the process, without missing any record.
Here Watermark design should be controlled by the developer.
Tumbling window is managed the adf.

Let say:
day1
day2 
day3

watermark process each day and hold the until what date i run. the next should start from their and watermark will update again.
If any failure happen watermark still hold the old value and thier onwards next run will happen even the run happened on next.
data won't get skipped.

If you want to run for the back dates just update the watermark and run it.


Tumbling window process one hourly bases. what ever the data come in that window it will process.
If any failure happen it will not process the next interval until the failure is fixed.
it won't skip any data.


Both are doing the same thing on the difference is control by us or ADF.
second is if incremental at database level good approach is using water.
If it is file based tumbling window is good.


Late ariving date handling is diffcult or complex using tumbling window.
let 11-12 interval batch is running exactly after it start a piece of data belong 11-12 window is came into table with timestamp of 12. this data will be get skipped.
in order to solve these kind of problem.

some delay will be added to the window
(5 or 10 minutes) still their is a chance of missing data here as well.

we should go with watermark timestamp for good design and to overcome this problem




system variables:
pipeline info, adf name, pipeline name, run id, time......



select * from person where createddate > '@{activity('LkpOldWaterMarkTimestamp').output.firstRow.lastmodifiedtime}' and 
createddate <= '@{activity('LkpNewWaterMarkTimestamp').output.firstRow.NewWaterMarkValue}'





CDC vs SCD:
I don't need CDC to implement SCD2. SCD2 and CDC solve different problems. SCD2 maintains historical records in the target. CDC identifies changed records in the source. If the source volume is manageable, I can detect changes using hash comparison and implement SCD2 without CDC. CDC becomes valuable when source tables are very large because it avoids scanning and comparing the entire dataset and provides only the changed rows.



Databricks tab in ADF:
Notebook: ETL code(bussines logic)
python (automated script, API calls, File Handling)
jar (create entire etl flow in the jar)
job (databricks job is schdedule in the adf).


Real Production Example:

Suppose you're building an Azure Data Lake solution:

SQL Server
    |
    v
ADF Copy Activity
    |
    v
ADLS Bronze
    |
    v
Databricks Notebook
    |
    v
Silver Layer
    |
    v
Databricks Notebook
    |
    v
Gold Layer
    |
    v
Synapse / Power BI

Here:

ADF = Orchestration
Databricks Notebook = Transformation





DataFlow running slow:
1. Look into Azure IR settings for Vcores
	Vcores is nothing but compute, try to increas the core and check the run time.
2. Check the execution of Dataflow to find out if the issue is on source/activity/destintion.
3. Check the IR region.
	Make sure everything created in same region.
	If services are in different reasons, processing will be slow.
4. check if general purpose or memory optimized compute type is used?
5. Check with MS if any issue going on from their end?
   If pipeline is working fine all of sudden it is taking more time to run 1. first check from your end on recent changes
   like code or confiuration ..... If you couldn't find any thing immedialtey raise a ticket with MS. If the issue is from their end they will return additional cost money.




Data Flow Running Slow – Troubleshooting Steps:
1. Understand the problem:
Is the Data Flow always slow or only recently?
Which transformation is taking time?
Has data volume increased?
Did any code/configuration change recently?

2. Check ADF Monitoring 
cluster startup time
source read time
transformation time
sink write time

3. check data volume:
has file size increased?
has partition count changed?

4. check source performance
is source query slow?
missing indexes
full table scans

5.check partitioning
Single partition
Hash partition
Round robin
Dynamic partitioning

6. check data skew:
1 customerID = 90% data
one executor processes most data

7. analyze join transformation
inner join
left
right 
full
broadcast join

8.check looup transformation
look table should be small size

9. derviced columns has any expensive operations
regex
nested if
string manipulations
complex expressions 

10. check aggregate transformation for shuffling 
groupby
count distinct
window functions

11. sink performance

12. check IR
	general purpose
	memory optimized

13. check recent changes




DMS:
In the context of Microsoft Azure, DMA stands for Data Migration Assistant. It is a free tool used to evaluate on-premises SQL Server databases and determine their readiness for migration to Azure. 

What Does DMA Do?
Before you move your databases to the cloud, DMA performs several vital checks:
Compatibility Analysis: It identifies any blockers, deprecated features, or unsupported code that might prevent a smooth migration to target environments like Azure SQL Database or Azure VMs.
Feature Recommendations: It suggests improvements for performance and reliability in your new target environment.
Schema & Data Transfer: It assists in moving your database schema, data, and uncontained objects (like logins and agent jobs) to the cloud


SSMS: SQL Server Management Studio (this is IDE using this also we can migrate on-prem database to Azure sql database)



Types of Databases in Azure:
Azure Database Services – Purpose & Use Cases
Service										Purpose										Typical Use Case
Azure SQL Database				Fully managed SQL Server database					OLTP applications, ERP, CRM
Azure SQL Database Hyperscale	Very large SQL databases (100 TB+)					Large SaaS applications, huge transactional systems
Azure Database for PostgreSQL	Open-source relational database						Web apps, GIS, analytics applications
Azure Database for MySQL		Open-source relational database						WordPress, e-commerce, web applications
Azure Cosmos DB					Globally distributed NoSQL database					IoT, gaming, real-time applications
Azure HorizonDB					Distributed PostgreSQL at scale						Multi-tenant SaaS and distributed OLTP workloads
Azure SQL Managed Instance		Lift-and-shift SQL Server migration					Existing SQL Server applications
SQL Server on 					Full SQL Server control								Legacy applications requiring OS/database control
Azure Virtual Machines
Azure DocumentDB				JSON document database								Legacy Cosmos DB references
Oracle Database@Azure			Oracle workloads on Azure							Oracle ERP, Oracle financial systems
Azure Managed Instance for 		Wide-column NoSQL database							Time-series, IoT, telecom systems
Apache Cassandra
MongoDB Atlas on Azure			JSON document database								Mobile apps, product catalogs
Azure Managed Redis				In-memory cache										Session storage, caching, low-latency reads



Migration from on-premise to Azure cloud:
When migrating data from On-Prem SQL Server to Azure, there are multiple approaches. The choice depends on data size, downtime requirements, frequency, and target system.
1. Azure data factory:   Most common 
on-prem SQL server
		|
	  SHIR
	  	|
Copy Acitivty(ADF)
		|
ADLS / Azure SQL ...


Use Cases
One-time migration
Incremental loads
Scheduled ETL pipelines
Advantages
Low-code
Parallel copy
Built-in monitoring


2. Azure data migration service (DMS)
Microsoft's dedicated migration service.

SQL Server
    |
    v
Azure DMS
    |
    v
Azure SQL Database

Use Cases
Database migration
Minimal downtime migrations
Lift-and-shift

Advantages
Schema + data migration
Online migrations supported

3. Backup and Restore

For large databases.

SQL Server Backup (.bak)
          |
          v
Azure Blob Storage
          |
          v
Azure SQL Managed Instance
Use Cases
Moving entire databases
SQL Managed Instance migrations
Advantages
Fast for large databases
Preserves schema, indexes, permissions


4. BCP (Bulk Copy Program)

Command-line bulk export/import.

bcp Customer out customer.csv -c -T
Use Cases
Table-level migration
Very large tables
Advantages
High performance
Simple

5. Databricks

For large-scale migrations and transformations.

SQL Server
     |
     v
Databricks
     |
     v
ADLS / Synapse
Use Cases
TB/PB scale data
Complex transformations
Advantages
Distributed processing
Spark-based


6. Files 

7. CDC-Based Migration
Initial Full Load
       +
CDC Changes
Use Cases
Large production systems
Minimal downtime
Advantages
Only changed records move
Supports inserts, updates, deletes


Common Issues During On-Prem SQL Server to Azure Migration
1. Slow network throughput between on-prem and Azure.   Copy activity running for days,   Low transfer speed.
2. Firewall & Connectivity Issues
	Problem
	ADF cannot connect to on-prem SQL Server.

3. Data Type Mismatches
4. Data Truncation   (data type size truncation ex: onpremise varchar(500), target varchar(100))
5. Primary Key / Duplicate Data Issues
6. Referential Integrity Issues
7. Large Table Performance Issues
8. Schema Compatibility Issues
9. Security & Permission Issues
10. Data Validation Issues


*** Database to Database   DMS is good option
On-prem to ADLS  -- ADF copy activity


50TB(main DB we are touching it only from backup) tooks 6 to 7 days using DMS full load.
CDC took 2 to 3 weeks of time.

Once migration is completed, all the applications will point to use cloud DB, for any reason if one of the applications is not working with new DB changes then all 
application need to revert this DB changes and point to on-prem DB.

Migration:
Large tables need to migrate it first and small tables.
Replicate the exact DB from on-prem to cloud same as DB, schema, tables, constraints, index...
drop the constrains once load is completed then add the constraints again....
















Triggers are scheduling:
Scheduled: Time-based trigger
File Arrival: when a new file arrive job will triggered and monitored unity catalog external.
Table update: table has updated then trigger
continuous: Infinite loop.
None: Manual run.



Email triggering is also can be done from databricks itself.
Email, team, slack....


Delta live table trigger:
Triggered: when data available triggers otherwise shutdown. trigger interval seconds, minutes, hours, daily.
continuous: runs continuously until manully stops.





Tool					Purpose							Where it runs						Best for
Databricks Jobs			Run Databricks workloads		Inside Databricks					Spark/Notebook pipelines
ADF	Data 				integration & orchestration		Azure cloud							End-to-end ETL pipelines
Airflow					Workflow orchestration			Anywhere (self-managed/cloud)		Complex DAG-based workflows


When to Use What?
Use Databricks Jobs when:
You are running Spark notebooks
ETL is fully inside Databricks
You want simple scheduling

Use ADF when:
You need data movement (copy activity)
You integrate multiple systems (SQL, APIs, Storage)
You want low-code pipelines

Use Airflow when:
You need complex DAG logic
You have multi-cloud systems
You need full programmatic control




Real-World Usage Pattern (Very Important)

In production, companies often use ALL THREE together:
ADF (Orchestration Layer)
        ↓
Databricks Jobs (Processing Layer)
        ↓
Delta Lake / SQL
        ↓
Airflow (Advanced workflow / cross-system orchestration)


# adf to databrics notebook
Creating a linked service from adf to databricks.
In pipeline get metadata activity select the databricks notebook.
In linked service need to select the cluster type.  here cluster is from databricks end. in order to run notebook need a cluster from databricks
1. New job cluster
2. Existing interactive cluster
3. Existing instance pool
4. serverless

Authentication type:
Access Token
managed service identity 
user-assigned managed identity



YAML:
Define pipeline and workflow steps:
Once a developer deploy a code to Azure Devops Repos.

Azure Devops teams will run pipeline to deploy code from one enivornment to another.

Dev - QA - UAT - Prod.

YAML file will have list of steps to deploy the code.
YAML is a language/format used to define CI/CD pipelines.


YAML is commonly used to define CI/CD pipelines as code. In data engineering projects, it helps automate the deployment of Databricks notebooks, Azure Data Factory pipelines, Azure Functions, and Terraform infrastructure. While Data Engineers are not always responsible for full DevOps ownership, understanding YAML is important because modern data platforms rely heavily on automated deployments and environment promotion processes.



Terraform Applies to Azure as well.






Azure Functions = writing a program (custom logic)
Logic Apps = building a flowchart (drag & drop workflow)


Azure Functions						Azure Logic Apps
Code-based execution				No-code / low-code workflow
Runs custom logic					Uses prebuilt connectors
Developer-focused					Business process automation
More flexible						Easier to build


Azure Functions
Write code (C#, Python, Java, etc.)
Full control over logic

Example:
def main(req):
    return "Hello World"


Logic Apps
Visual designer (no code)
Uses connectors

Example:
When file arrives → send email → call API → update SQL


Use Cases
Azure Functions (best for):
Complex transformations
Data validation
Custom APIs
Trigger Databricks jobs


Event processing logic
Logic Apps (best for):
Workflow automation
Notifications (email, Teams)
SaaS integrations (Salesforce, Outlook, etc.)
Simple orchestration


Pricing Model
Azure Functions
Pay per execution
Based on compute time

Logic Apps
Pay per action (step in workflow)




Event GRID:
Azure Event Grid is an event routing service used to react to events such as file uploads, resource changes, or custom application events. It is commonly used to trigger Azure Functions, Logic Apps, or ADF pipelines. Event Grid is used for event notifications.


Event Hub:
Azure Event Hubs is a highly scalable event streaming platform designed to ingest and process millions of events per second. whereas Event Hub is used for high-throughput real-time streaming and analytics workloads.




ADF deployment will be done using arm template (Azure devops CI/CD).






ADF:
Lookup Activity:
Read a small amount of data and pass it to the next activity. It is not designed for moving large datasets.
use-case:
configuration,   (keep schema name, table name, value.... instead of harding keep value in table and use dynamically in pipeline with ADF).
table name,    (metadata -drive approach loading multiple tables.)
watermark. 


lookup               vs             get metadata:
Lookup	                            Get Metadata
Reads data/content	                Reads metadata
SQL query	                        File properties
Reads table rows	                Reads file name, size, last modified, child items
Used for configuration tables	    Used for file/folder information











