unity catalog architecture:

There are five principal architectural layers:
Databricks account and identity layer
Unity Catalog metastore
Workspace and compute layer
Metadata and authorization layer
Cloud-storage data layer


1. Databricks Account Layer:
Unity Catalog starts at the Databricks account level, above individual workspaces.
Databricks Account
├── Users
├── Groups
├── Service principals
├── Unity Catalog metastore
└── Databricks workspaces

Users, groups and service principals are account-level identities.

2. Unity Catalog Metastore:
The metastore is the central component of Unity Catalog architecture.

It stores governance metadata such as:
Catalog and schema definitions
Table and view definitions
Object ownership
Permissions and grants
Storage credentials
External locations
Connections
Lineage information
Sharing metadata

It does not normally contain the actual business-table data.
Unity Catalog metastore
├── Metadata
├── Permissions
├── Storage-access definitions
└── Data lineage

The actual data stays in ADLS Gen2, S3 or GCS.


3. Metadata Namespace Layer:
Inside the metastore, objects follow a three-level namespace:

Catalog
└── Schema
    └── Object


4. Workspace and Compute Layer:
Users work inside a Databricks workspace using:

Notebooks
Databricks SQL
Workflows
Lakeflow pipelines
SQL warehouses

The workspace itself does not own the Unity Catalog objects. It provides an interface and compute resources for accessing them.

5. Storage-Access Layer:
For data stored in external cloud storage, Unity Catalog uses:
Cloud identity
      ↓
Storage credential
      ↓
External location
      ↓
External table or volume
      ↓
ADLS Gen2 path


what is the use of unity catalog in databricks before catalog how it worked and what issues does unity catalog solved.
What is Unity Catalog?

Unity Catalog is Databricks’ centralized governance layer for data and AI assets. It controls:

What data and AI assets exist
Where the underlying data is stored
Who can access each asset
What operations users can perform
How data moves between sources and targets
Who accessed or changed an asset

It governs objects such as tables, views, files/volumes, functions, machine-learning models, external locations and connections across multiple Databricks workspaces. Databricks Unity Catalog overview

Before Unity Catalog:
Databricks primarily used the legacy workspace-local Hive metastore.
The namespace normally had two levels:
database.table

Example:
SELECT * FROM sales.orders;

Each workspace generally had its own Hive metastore:

Development workspace → Dev Hive metastore
Test workspace        → Test Hive metastore
Production workspace  → Production Hive metastore
How access worked

Organizations commonly used a combination of:

Hive metastore table ACLs
Workspace-local users and groups
Cluster permissions
Cloud storage permissions
DBFS mounts
Service principals and storage keys
Secrets stored in Databricks secret scopes
Separate external governance/catalog products

For example, a storage account might be mounted using a service principal:

dbutils.fs.mount(
    source="abfss://container@account.dfs.core.windows.net/",
    mount_point="/mnt/sales",
    extra_configs={
        "fs.azure.account.oauth2.client.secret": dbutils.secrets.get(
            scope="storage-secrets",
            key="client-secret"
        )
    }
)

A user who gained access to the cluster or mount could potentially access the underlying files directly, even if the intended table permissions were more restrictive.

Problems with the legacy approach
Problem	Before Unity Catalog
Governance scope	Primarily workspace-level
Namespace	database.table
Users and groups	Often workspace-local
Cross-workspace access	Difficult to manage consistently
Storage credentials	Frequently configured on clusters or mounts
File-level security	Hard to centrally enforce
Data lineage	Limited or dependent on external tools
Auditing	Fragmented across workspaces and cloud services
Data discovery	No unified enterprise catalog
Fine-grained security	More limited and difficult to standardize
Data sharing	Copies, exports or custom solutions were common
ML governance	Separate from table governance
Permission administration	Frequently duplicated across workspaces

For example, if an organization had five workspaces, administrators might need to create the same groups, 
register similar tables and reproduce permissions five times.

How Unity Catalog works
Unity Catalog introduces an account-level governance model. 
A Unity Catalog metastore is assigned to one or more Databricks workspaces, normally within the same cloud region.

It uses a three-level namespace:

catalog.schema.object

For example:

SELECT *
FROM production_sales.curated.orders;

Here:

production_sales is the catalog
curated is the schema
orders is the table

A common design is:

dev_sales.bronze.customer
dev_sales.silver.customer
dev_sales.gold.customer_summary

test_sales.bronze.customer
test_sales.silver.customer
test_sales.gold.customer_summary

prod_sales.bronze.customer
prod_sales.silver.customer
prod_sales.gold.customer_summary

Catalogs are commonly used as isolation boundaries for environments, business units or data domains.

Issues solved by Unity Catalog
1. Centralized access control

Permissions are managed centrally and can apply across workspaces.

GRANT USE CATALOG
ON CATALOG prod_sales
TO `sales_analysts`;

GRANT USE SCHEMA
ON SCHEMA prod_sales.gold
TO `sales_analysts`;

GRANT SELECT
ON TABLE prod_sales.gold.monthly_revenue
TO `sales_analysts`;

This provides one consistent permission model for SQL, notebooks, jobs and BI tools.

2. Account-level identities

Unity Catalog permissions use account-level users, groups and service principals instead of relying solely on workspace-local identities.

For example:

Group: sales_analysts
        ↓
SELECT on prod_sales.gold tables
        ↓
Available from authorized workspaces

This reduces duplicated identity and permission management. The legacy Hive metastore, by comparison, applies permissions to workspace-local identities. Legacy Hive metastore comparison

3. Secure storage access

Unity Catalog introduces governed objects such as:

Storage credentials
External locations
External tables
Managed tables
Managed and external volumes

Instead of giving every cluster a storage secret, an administrator creates a storage credential and external location:

CREATE EXTERNAL LOCATION migration_landing
URL 'abfss://landing@companylake.dfs.core.windows.net/netezza'
WITH (STORAGE CREDENTIAL adls_migration_credential);

Users can receive access to the governed location without receiving the underlying Azure credential:

GRANT READ FILES
ON EXTERNAL LOCATION migration_landing
TO `migration_engineers`;
4. Reduced direct file-access bypass

Previously, users might query files directly:

spark.read.parquet("/mnt/prod/customer")

That could bypass table-level governance.

With Unity Catalog, access to tables, volumes and external locations is checked through a centralized authorization model. This improves control and auditability, provided the underlying cloud storage is configured so users cannot bypass Unity Catalog directly.

5. Fine-grained security

Unity Catalog supports controls such as:

Table and view permissions
Row filters
Column masks
Dynamic views
Tags and attribute-based access policies
Workspace-to-catalog bindings

Example of column masking:

CREATE FUNCTION security.mask_email(email STRING)
RETURN CASE
    WHEN is_account_group_member('customer_pii_users')
        THEN email
    ELSE 'REDACTED'
END;

The function can then be applied as a column mask so authorized users see the email while other users see a redacted value.

6. Automated lineage

Unity Catalog can capture relationships such as:

Netezza landing data
        ↓
Bronze customer table
        ↓
Silver standardized customer
        ↓
Gold customer revenue
        ↓
Power BI dashboard

This helps answer:

Where did this column come from?
Which jobs modified this table?
Which downstream tables will be affected?
Which dashboards use this data?

Unity Catalog provides lineage across supported data and AI assets. Unity Catalog capabilities

7. Centralized auditing

Unity Catalog-related system tables and audit logs help identify:

Who queried a table
Who changed permissions
Who created or deleted an object
Which service principal executed a job
When sensitive data was accessed

This is important for security investigations and regulatory compliance.

8. Data discovery

Users can use Catalog Explorer to search and understand available assets, including:

Tables and columns
Owners
Comments
Tags and classifications
Lineage
Sample data
Permissions
Usage information

This reduces duplicate datasets and makes trusted data easier to find.

9. Governed data sharing

Unity Catalog supports secure sharing of live data and AI assets through sharing capabilities such as Delta Sharing/Open Sharing. 
This can avoid exporting and copying files for every consumer.

10. Unified data and AI governance

The same governance model can cover more than tables:

Structured tables and views
Unstructured files through volumes
Functions
ML models
Feature-related assets
Connections and external data sources
Model services and other AI assets


Hive metastore  versus  Unity Catalog:
Feature	Legacy              Hive metastore	                    Unity Catalog
Scope	                    Workspace-level	                Account-level across workspaces
Namespace	                database.table	                catalog.schema.object
Identities	                Workspace-local groups	        Account-level identities
Permissions	Mainly tables/views	Data, files, functions, models and more
Storage governance	Mounts and cluster credentials common	Storage credentials and external locations
Lineage	                    Limited	                        Built-in automatic lineage
Auditing	                Fragmented	                    Centralized auditability
Data discovery	            Workspace-oriented	            Central Catalog Explorer
Row/column security	More manual	Row filters, masks and governed policies
Data sharing	            Custom copying/export	        Governed sharing
Environment isolation	    Separate workspaces/metastores	Catalog and workspace bindings
ML governance	            Separate	                    Integrated with Unity Catalog



Delta table      versus       Parquet table
Capability	                    Parquet	                            Delta
Data storage	                Parquet files	                   Parquet files
Transaction log	                    No	                                    Yes
ACID transactions	            No	                                    Yes
UPDATE and DELETE	            Not natively transactional	            Yes
MERGE	                            No	                                    Yes
Time travel	                    No	                                    Yes
Schema enforcement	            Limited	                            Yes
Concurrent-write safety	            Limited	                            Yes
Change Data Feed	            No	                                    Yes




managed vs external volume:
volume means file store here.
unity catalog managed both managed volume and external volume.
If a managed volume drops,  
Unity Catalog metadata and eventually removes the underlying managed files according to the platform’s lifecycle behavior.

external volume:
only metadata will be delete, file remains in external location.
because files are from another service example s3.


Lakehouse federation:
cross-join of data from two different source system we use lakehouse federation concept:
one source system is databricks
other one is Azure sql data, mysql, postgresql, redshift, snowflake, redshift etc....

why because other source system has hugh data, copying or moving to databricks bit expensive. 
Instead of moving data into databricks, keeping data in that source system and query it.


Architecture:


user application                                                 unity catalog
                                                                        ^
                                                                        |
                                                                        |        
databricks compute              connection object                 foriegn catalog
      |           |                     |                               ^
                                        |                               |
SQL query         return results        |                               |
      |                      ^          |                               |
      |                      |          |                               |
      |                      |                                          |
      |------------------->External data base ----------------------------


Connection object:
A connection is a Unity Catalog securable object containing the information needed to connect to an external system.

It includes:
Database type
Host
Port
Authentication configuration
Connection options

foriegn catalog:
A foreign catalog represents the external database’s metadata inside Unity Catalog.


When query submitted to databricks compute first it will check the connection in unity catalog and then permission 
to access external database object.
Once these two are good, now databricks will connect to external source system and execute the query there and 
get the result back to databricks.

These result can be used to join with delta tables.

Example:
SELECT
    region,
    SUM(amount) AS total_amount
FROM sales_federated.dbo.orders
WHERE order_date >= DATE '2026-01-01'
GROUP BY region;

The processing flow is:

The user submits the SQL to Databricks compute.
Unity Catalog resolves sales_federated.dbo.orders.
Unity Catalog checks the user’s permissions.
Databricks identifies the connection and external source.
Supported filters, projections, and aggregations are pushed to the source.
Azure SQL executes the pushed-down work.
The source returns the result to Databricks.
Databricks completes any remaining processing.
The result is returned to the user.



Delta sharing:
Delta Sharing is an open protocol that allows an organization to securely share live data with another team or organization without copying the data and without sharing cloud-storage credentials.

The recipient receives read-only access, while the provider continues to own and control the original data.

Provider owns the data → creates a share → grants it to a recipient → recipient queries it using their own compute.

How it happens means 
databricks to databricks
or
databricks to open 
here Authentication purpose credentials need to be shared.

Example:
Company A owns this table:
production.sales.orders
Company A wants to share it with Company B.

Step 1: Create a share
CREATE SHARE company_b_sales_share;

Step 2: Add the table
ALTER SHARE company_b_sales_share
ADD TABLE production.sales.orders;

Step 3: Create the recipient
CREATE RECIPIENT company_b;

Step 4: Grant access
GRANT SELECT
ON SHARE company_b_sales_share
TO RECIPIENT company_b;

Company B can now query the shared table using its own compute.
